INTRODUCTION
Learning to read is one of the key outcomes for early
education and children who have reading difficulties often enter a downward spiral of low educational attainment and poor employment
prospects with negative consequences for adult
well-being. When we consider problems in learning
to read, it is important to make a clear distinction
between decoding (the accuracy or fluency of reading aloud) and comprehension (the adequacy of
understanding text). Problems in learning to decode
(developmental dyslexia) and problems in learning
to comprehend text (reading comprehension
impairment) are distinct forms of difficulty, both
of which appear to depend principally upon impairments of oral language development. As we will
outline below, Dyslexia is related to early problems
in oral language development, with persisting problems in the development of speech-sound (phonological) skills being a particularly important obstacle
to learning to decode print. In contrast, reading
comprehension impairment depends critically
upon broader oral language difficulties; particularly
problems with understanding word meanings, and
problems with grammatical skills.
DYSLEXIA
Definition and prevalence
Developmental dyslexia is the most widely used term
for children who experience severe difficulties in
learning to decode print. Children with dyslexia
find it hard to recognize printed words, have great
difficulties ‘sounding out’ unfamiliar words, and
often also read slowly. In European languages, which
have more regular writing systems than English, the
main symptoms of dyslexia are poor reading fluency
and spelling but the predictors of reading (and
a
Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, University College
London and b
St John’s College, Oxford, UK
Correspondence to Professor Charles Hulme, Division of Psychology
and Language Sciences, University College London, Chandler House, 2
Wakefield Street, London WC1N 1PF, UK. Tel: +44 20 7679 4285;
e-mail: c.hulme@ucl.ac.uk
Curr Opin Pediatr 2016, 28:731–735
DOI:10.1097/MOP.0000000000000411
This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License 4.0 (CCBY), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
1040-8703 Copyright  2016 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. www.co-pediatrics.com
REVIEW
dyslexia) are the same, namely letter knowledge,
phoneme awareness and rapid naming (RAN) skills
[1].
It is important to emphasize that reading skills,
like many other human characteristics (e.g., weight,
blood pressure) show a continuous distribution in the
population. As such, the criteria used for diagnosis are
to some extent arbitrary (just as for obesity or hypertension). A common criterion for diagnosing dyslexia
is reading accuracymore than 1.5 SD below themean,
which results in roughly 7% of the population being
identified as dyslexic [2]. Dyslexia ismore common in
males, and is frequently comorbid with other developmental disorders such as specific language impairment (SLI), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
or developmental coordination disorder [3].
Risk factors for dyslexia
Dyslexia runs in families and twin studies have established that difficulties with reading and related skills
are highly heritable. More recently, molecular
genetic analyses have identified many potential candidate genes of small effect associated with individual
differences in reading [4]. Notwithstanding the
importance of genetic factors, the home literacy
environment [5] and the quality of teaching are likely
additional influences on reading development.
Furthermore, genes act through the environment
and both passive and active gene–environment correlations can be expected to affect literacy outcomes.
Parents with dyslexia not only share genes with their
offspring, but also plausibly may provide a different
home literacy environment to that found in homes
where parents do not experience literacy difficulties.
Similarly, children who are poor readers are less likely
to seek out opportunities for reading than good readers and hence will have less exposure to print. Low
levels of print exposure and reading practice will, in
turn, compromise reading development.
For many years, studies of the likely cognitive
causes of dyslexia were dominated by case–control
studies of highly selected clinical groups. Such studies are subject to referral bias and often children with
comorbid conditions are excluded from study
samples. Arguably a more robust approach is offered
by prospective longitudinal studies, which follow
the development of children at high risk of dyslexia
from the preschool years, to examine the characteristics of those who go on to be dyslexic to identify
causal risk factors.
Studies of children at family risk of dyslexia by
virtue of having a first degree affected relative have
highlighted the crucial importance of language to
literacy development. Several studies of children at
family risk of dyslexia have been completed and
others are ongoing [6&&]. These studies show a
heightened prevalence of dyslexia in the offspring
of affected parents, with some 44% developing dyslexia. These studies also show that dyslexia is not ‘all
or none’. Rather, among children at family risk of
dyslexia, literacy outcomes are distributed continuously with some children, while not qualifying for
the label of dyslexia, nonetheless showing dyslexic
symptoms, including relatively poor reading
fluency and spelling.
The findings of family risk studies also show that
single deficit accounts of dyslexia are inadequate.
Although such studies confirm that poor phonological skills (e.g., poor nonword repetition in the preschool and poor phoneme awareness in the school
years) are primary risk factors for poor reading,
dyslexia is more likely to be ‘diagnosed’ when
broader language impairments (including difficulties with grammar and poor vocabulary) persist into
the school years. Such findings add to a growing
body of evidence that a phonological deficit is one
of a number of risk factors for dyslexia that accumulate towards a threshold [7].
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN DYSLEXIA AND
LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT
Preschool profiles
It is well established that children with speech and
language difficulties are at risk of literacy problems
and there are likely to be shared endophenotypes
between SLI, speech sound disorder, and dyslexia
[8]. Bishop and Snowling [9] suggested that dyslexia
and language impairment are both characterized by
KEY POINTS
 There are two main types of reading difficulty;
problems with word-level decoding (dyslexia) and
problems with reading comprehension. Some children
experience both.
 There is a heightened prevalence of dyslexia in
children with a dyslexic parent and being at family risk
of dyslexia is the strongest risk factors for poor reading
from the preschool years.
 Many children with dyslexia experience language
delays and difficulties as preschoolers.
 Dyslexia is the outcome of multiple risk factors.
 Interventions for poor reading should promote oral
language skills in the preschool years and phoneme
awareness in the early school years to provide a strong
foundation for later literacy development.
Neurology
732 www.co-pediatrics.com Volume 28  Number 6  December 2016
poor phonology (a shared risk factor for poor decoding) but differ in the extent to which broader
language difficulties (vocabulary and comprehension) are implicated. However, few studies have
made direct comparisons between the disorders as
SLI tends to be diagnosed in the preschool years,
whereas dyslexia is typically diagnosed much later
(after a child has been in school for some years but
failed to make adequate progress in learning to
read).
Nash et al. [10], Hulme et al. [11&&], and Snowling
et al. [12&
] followed the development of children at
family risk of dyslexia and children with preschool
language impairment in the Wellcome Language
and Reading Project – a 5-year longitudinal study
from age 3.5 to 8 years. Three groups of preschool
children were recruited to the study: children at
family risk of dyslexia, children considered to be
language impaired, and children at low risk of dyslexia (controls). Following parental assessment of
literacy skills, children were initially classified as
either at family risk or not at risk. Next, following
a language assessment, the children were grouped
according to whether they fulfilled criteria for
language impairment, defined as at least 1 SD below
the mean on measures of receptive and expressive
language skills. This procedure yielded four groups
of children: typically developing, children with SLI,
children at family risk of dyslexia (FR), and children
at family risk of dyslexia with SLI. It is noteworthy
that about a third of the children at family risk of
dyslexia also had a preschool language impairment.
These children did not differ from the SLI-only
group on any phonological or language measure,
whereas the FR-only group had difficulties only on
phonological tasks that tapped speech production,
namely articulation and word and nonword repetition. They also showed subtle and short-lived difficulties with grammar (problems with marking the
past tense – ed, and third person singular – s) and in
repeating sentences accurately. Gooch et al. [13]
went on to show that the children in the SLI groups
were more likely to have difficulties with attention
and motor development than children at family risk
without language impairment.
Predictors of individual differences in
reading
Hulme et al. [11&&] tracked the progress of the children from the three risk groups and controls at ages
3.5, 4.5, 5.5, and 8 years and used the data in a path
model to investigate the causal relationships
between language and literacy skills. At 3.5 years,
a single language factor could be defined by performance on tests of vocabulary, grammar,
conceptual understanding, repetition, and articulation (with repetition and articulation loading least
well on this factor, possibly because they also tap
speech processes). Language at 3.5 years predicted
the foundations for decoding: namely letter knowledge, RAN, and phoneme awareness with the
relationship between language and phoneme awareness being particularly strong. In turn, letter knowledge and phoneme awareness measured at 4.5 years
predicted decoding skills at 5.5 years. Reading comprehension at 8 years of age was predicted by decoding at 5.5 together with language at 3.5 years.
These findings underline the importance of oral
language development for reading development.
The impact of language development at 3.5 years
on decoding was fully mediated by phoneme awareness and letter knowledge, and there was a direct
long range effect of language skills at 3.5 years on
reading comprehension measured some 5 years later
at age 8 years. A clear implication is that children
with poor language skills in the preschool years are
at high risk of developing both dyslexia and reading
comprehension impairment. However, there is a
complication. It is not uncommon for children
who show delayed language development in the
preschool years to ‘catch up’ and for speech difficulties to resolve. In this light, Bishop and Adams
[14] proposed a ‘critical age hypothesis’ – only when
children have problems with language (or speech)
development that persist to the point of school
entry will they succumb to reading problems.
Trajectories of language development
To investigate language development in the Wellcome Language and Reading Project, and more
specifically, to differentiate children with persistent
versus resolving language impairments, Snowling
et al. [12&
] examined the progress of individual
children at three time points: preschool (3.5 years),
school entry (5.5 years), and the middle of primary
school (8 years). By assessing each child on tests
tapping receptive and expressive grammar and
vocabulary, it was possible to determine whether
or not they fulfilled criteria for SLI at the different
time points. In total, 66% of the children in the
sample had normal language at all three times.
Among the others, it was possible to discern three
trajectories of development: 16% had language
impairments that resolved, whereas 56% had persisting language impairments. In addition, some
28% showed late emerging language impairments;
these children performed well within the normal
range on language tasks at 3.5 years, yet scored as
poorly as the persisting group at age 8 years. It is
noteworthy that this ‘late emerging’ trajectory was
Spoken and written language Hulme and Snowling
1040-8703 Copyright  2016 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. www.co-pediatrics.com 733
strongly associated with familial dyslexia. In line
with the critical age hypothesis, children with early
language difficulties, which resolved by the start of
formal literacy instruction tended to have good
literacy outcomes, but children with both persisting
and later emerging difficulties tended to have reading difficulties with more than 40% of each group
affected.
Screening and assessment
Given that dyslexia has its precursors in preschool, it
may be possible to identify children early with a view
to providing early intervention. However, screening
is not straightforward because risk and protective
factors interact during learning to read. Using data
from a Finnish longitudinal study, Puolakanaho et al.
[15] showed that being at family risk of dyslexia
increases the probability of reading disability. However, if letter-naming skills develop early, the risk is
considerably decreased. Similarly, for a child with
poor letter-naming skills at 4.5 and 5.5 years, the
probability of dyslexia is lower if he or she has good
phonological awareness or efficient RAN.
In a similar vein, data from the Wellcome
Language and Reading Project confirmed a changing pattern of prediction of dyslexia at different ages
[16]. Although family-risk status was a stronger predictor of dyslexia from preschool than language
difficulties were, at the time of school entry, poor
language skill was a significant risk factor.
Additional predictors in the preschool years
included letter knowledge, phonological awareness,
RAN, and executive skills and, at the time of school
entry, motor skills slightly increased the prediction
probability. These findings underline the fact that
dyslexia is the outcome of multiple risk factors and
confirm that children with language difficulties at
school entry are at high risk. However, screening for
dyslexia does not reach an acceptable clinical level
until close to school entry when letter knowledge,
phonological awareness, and RAN, rather than family risk, together provide good sensitivity and specificity as a screening battery.
INTERVENTIONS FOR CHILDREN’S
READING AND LANGUAGE DIFFICULTIES
We began by arguing that there are two types of
reading disorder and we showed that the predictors
of decoding (and hence dyslexia) differ from the
predictors of reading comprehension. It follows that
different forms of intervention are required for children with dyslexia compared with ‘poor comprehenders’. The evidence reviewed so far suggests that
early interventions to strengthen the language
foundations for reading will be important. There
is growing evidence from randomized trials that
educational interventions for reading and related
learning disorders are effective when delivered by
trained practitioners [17]. In general terms, interventions to promote decoding (and hence remediate dyslexia) comprise training in phoneme
awareness linked to letter knowledge, together with
systematic phonic instruction in the context of
book reading. In contrast, interventions to promote
reading comprehension involve work to improve
oral language skills (including work on vocabulary
and narrative skills) and emphasis on the use of
inferences and metacognitive strategies to ensure
coherent understanding of text [18].
Fricke et al. [19] evaluated an oral language
programme aimed at improving vocabulary, grammar, narrative and active listening skills, and also
assessed its impact on reading. Children receiving
the intervention made greater gains in oral language
and narrative skills than a waiting-list control group
who received ‘business as usual’ and their phoneme
awareness and letter knowledge also improved.
Although the programme contained no activities
directed towards reading, and no gains were made
in decoding skills, an important outcome was that
the intervention group showed significant gains in
reading comprehension 6 months after the intervention had ended. Moreover, these gains were fully
mediated by gains in oral language.
CONCLUSION
Dyslexia represents the lower end of a continuous
distribution of reading skills in the population. The
oral language weaknesses that are the precursors of
dyslexia can be observed in the preschool period.
Being at family risk of dyslexia is an important risk
factor and a major proximal cause is in speech
processing (phonological) difficulties. Although
dyslexia is primarily a decoding difficulty, many
children also experience reading comprehension
problems associated with co-occurring language difficulties. We believe that screening for language
difficulties should be conducted at school entry to
identify children who are at risk of difficulties in
learning to read. There is good evidence from
randomized trials that language interventions can
ameliorate language weaknesses detected in the
early school years. Similarly, specialist teaching
methods are effective in ameliorating the problems
in learning to decode print that are seen in children
with dyslexia.